# Advanced topics in wireless communications


- SLOCK Dirk
- MALAK Derya
- STAVROU Fotios
- PADAKANDLA Arun
- ELIA Petros

## Abstract

Hot Topics in Mobile Communications

This course presents some recent or emerging  HOT TOPICS within the area of mobile networks.
The course is modified from 2014 (and earlier) versions to allow focus on updated set of hot topics and trends in mobile communications.
We emphasize emerging techniques to be used in future 5G mobile networks to allow for a significant increase in user quality, and network capacity.

The course earns 5 ECTS

We cover hot topics for 5G such as "Massive MIMO" , "network cooperation", "interference management", and "device coordination". These topics cover 21 hours.

In the other 21hours, external experts (Intel, Huawei, ETSI, etc.) from Industry reveal hot topics seen from the wireless networking  industry.
Teaching and Learning Methods : Lectures, Exercise and  Lab sessions (group of 2 students)

`Course Policies :` Attendance to Lab session is mandatory (25% of final grade).


`Bibliography`

Some overview papers will be distributed in class, covering the different hot topics.


## Requirements

Basic knowledge in statistical signal processing and probabilities, and digital communications. Basic MATLAB knowledge for the lab session - No C programming needed.


## Description

Our society is evolving towards a society of "massive information" generated by a plethora of devices (cars, tablets, connected things) most of which will have to work wirelessly. How does one design the networks of the future that can face the challenges: How does one optimize the use of spectrum? How does one tackle massive interference?. 5G networks will bring a few new concepts on the table to solve these problems, are are explained in this course.

The course contains a theoretical part (21hrs) and a practical part (21hrs). In the theoretical part you will receive knowledge about key concepts of wireless system design currently being discussed for future application in wireless network, including hot topics like

- MIMO and Massive MIMO
- Interference management
- Network Cooperation
- Device coordination(e.g. use of wireless-enabled drones for flexible network deployment)
- Emerging techniques for 5G (Device to Device (D2D) communications, millimeter wave communication, content caching)

You will lean their mathematical modeling and basic techniques.    

In the practical part you will learn from external industrial experts about how wireless standards and products are being designed from industry to capture some of the theoretical concepts.

`Learning outcomes:`

Understand key ideas behind the fantastic surge in performance in new mobile network generations. Understand the role of statistical data processing driving latest communication technologies such as MIMO and massive MIMO. Grasp new concepts for interference management. Learn from top industrial experts about the latest trends in research labs driving the development of broadband wireless and internet of thing. Understand the role of industry cooperation towards common standards like 5G and 6G.
 
`Nb hours:` 42.00 including 3hr exercise session, 3hrs lab session.

`Grading Policy:` 
- Final Exam (35%.) 2 hours  (all ATW documents allowed)
- Midterm Exam (20%) 1 hour approximately (all ATW documents allowed)
- Extra (research presentation, etc) (25%),
- Attendance (20%)

For attendance, students may miss up to 2 classes without penalty. 
Beyond that, each additional missed class will result in a 10% reduction of the attendance grade.
